---
layout: post
title: Excel 2/3
categories: [Tech]

---

> You are limited only by your imagination. If you can describe it, you can program it.

To add a Macro, Create a module in the VBA window. Insert -> Module

You can select this module and change its name in the properties window.



- Protecting your VBA Codes
  1. Open VBA editor
  2. Tools -> VBAProject Properties
  3. Go to 'Protection' tab
  4. Check the box 'Lock project for viewing' and set a password



- Objects Methods and Properties

  **Objects and Methods**

  Everything in Excel is an `Object`.  It is like a class equivalent in any OOPS.

  - A `Method` is an action or something to do with the `Object`. 

    ​	Example: `Banana.Eat` Here *Banana* is the Object and *Eat* is the Method

  - A `Method` may have many `Parameters`. Between `Method` and `Parameter` there is always a space. 

  - After specifying a parameter, there is always a `:=` sign. Indicating that you are working with a method parameter. After this sign, appears the value of the parameter.

    Example: `Banana.Eat EatingStyle:=PeelAndMunch` Here *Banana* is the Object, and *Eat* is the Method, 

    *EatingStyle* is the parameter and *PeelAndMunch* is the value of the parameter

  **Objects and Properties**

  Objects also have properties just like it has got methods. 

  - A Property is specified just like calling a `Method` of an Object, but here, `=` sign is used to assign the value of the property.

    Example: `Banana.Color = Yellow`  Here *Banana* is the Object and *Color* is the Property and *Yellow* is the value assigned to the Color  property.

    A property can have many other properties which can be called by a `.` (dot) operator.

    Example:  `Range("A5").Font.Bold = True` 

- Hierarchy

  Excel -> Worksheet -> Cells

  Example: `Workbooks("Book1.xlsx").Sheets("Sheet1").Range("A5")`

- Range Object

  Example: `Range("A5:A14").Select`, `Range("A5, B7, C9").Select `, `Range("A5:B5, A7:C7,A9:C10").Select` 

- Whatever is selected gets assigned to the object `Selection`

- Cells Object

  Example: `Cells(5, 1).Select`, `Range(Cells(5, 1), Cells(14, 1)).Select`

- ActiveCell Property

  Whatever cell is selected at present is referred to as ActiveCell

  Example: `ActiveCell.Font.Bold = True`

- Offset Property

  Offsets by some row and column.

  Example: `Range("A5").Offset(1, 0).Select` will select cell A6. `Range("A5").Offset(-1, 0).Select` will select cell A4

- End Property

  Does the job of Ctrl+Left_arrow, Ctrl+Right_arrow, Ctrl+Up_arrow, Ctrl+Down_arrow

  Example: `Range("A5").End(xlToRight).Select`,  `Range("A5").Select  Selection.End(xlToRight).Select`, `ActiveCell.End(xlToDown).Select`, `ActiveCell.End(xlUp).Select`, `ActiveCell.End(xlDown).Select`

- CurrentRegion Property

  CurrentRegion Property of an object selects anything which is bordered by blank cells.

- ActiveCell is different from Select cell. There can be many selected cells, but there will always be one and only one active cell.

- ActiveSheet Property

  Just like ActiveCell

  Example: `ActiveSheet.Next.Select`, `ActiveSheet.Previous.Select`

- Calling a sheet by VB Name

  What if some user renames a sheet. The reference would be lost. Therefore after creating a sheet, open macro and give a VB name to the sheet. This name is different from what the user gives. 

  Example, In the VB editor window, the sheet will be shown by the name `fruits (MySecondSheet)`. Here *fruits* is the user given name and *MySecondSheet* is the name given by the developer of the full Excel Workbook and Macros. This name in parenthesis won,t change unless the sheet gets deleted.

  `MySecondSheet.Select`

- Sheets Vs. Worksheets

  Sheets will recognize any kind of sheet in excel be it chart sheet or worksheet or anything, whereas Worksheets will recognize regular excel sheets. They are the sheets that you can see down the bottom. 

- Activating a Workbook

  `ThisWorkbook.Activate`, `Workbooks("Jeet first book").Activate`,  `Workbooks(1).Activate`

  A sheet of a workbook can only be selected only after the workbook is Activated.

- Value Property and Writing data

  Example: `Range("A1").Value = "Hello World"`, `Cells(13, 1).Value = "Hello World"`, `Range("A1:G11").Value = "Hello World"`

- Reading data to a variable

  Example: `MyFirstVariable = ActiveCell.Value`

- For multiline code, use ` _` *i.e*  \<space\>_ then move on to the next line.

  Example: 

  ```vb
  Workbooks("Book1.xlsx"). _
  	Sheets("Sheet2"). _
  		Range("A1").Value = "Hello World!"
  ```

- Copy And Paste

  Syntax: \<Source Range\> \<Destination Range\>

  Example: `Range("A1:A3").Copy Range("B1")`

- Commonly used properties:

  Font.Bold ("True"/"False") , Font.FontStyle ("Bold"/"Regular"/"Bold italic") 

  Interior.Color ("vbRed")
  
  Row
  
  Column
  
- Address Property:

  Returns addresses in their *absolute*  cell reference.

  `MyVeryLastRowAddress = Range("A1048576").End(xlUp).Address`

  `MyFirstBlankAddress = Range("A1048576").End(xlUp).Offset(1, 0).Address`

- Column the Column Letter

  `MyColumnLetter = Split(ActiveCell.Address, "$")(1)`

  `MyRowNumber = Split(ActiveCell.Address, "$")(2)` 

- More useful properties:

  Get the Windows User Name: `MyUserName = Environ$("Username")`

  Get the *active* workbook name: `MyActiveWorkBookName = ActiveWorkbook.Name` *Active* workbook may not be the one where the code resides.

  Get *this* workbook name (Not necessarily the Acive workbook): `ThisWorkbook.Name`  *This* workbook is the one where the code resides. 

  Get the path to the *active* workbook: `ActiveWorkbook.Path`

  Get the path to the *this* workbook: `ThisWorkbook.Path`

  Get the full path to the *active* workbook and append the name at the end of it. `MyFullName = ActiveWorkbook.Fullname` 

  Get the full path to the *this* workbook and append the name at the end of it. `MyFullName = ThisWorkbook.Fullname` 

  Get the current sheet name `ActiveSheet.Name`

  Get the active cell address `ActiveCell.Address`
  Get various properties of the active workbook

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Application Name")`

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Author")`

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Company")`

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Creation Date")`

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Last Author")`

  `MyVariousAttributes = ActiveWorkbook.BuiltinDocumentProperties("Last Save Time")`

  Get count of number of sheets in the workbook `ActiveWorkbook.Sheets.Count`

  Get the sheet index number of the current sheet `ActiveSheet.Index`

  Get count of the number of open workbooks `Application.Workbooks.Count`

- Opening a Workbook in various modes:

  Opening

  `Workbooks.Open Filename:="C:\Users\Jeet\Document\Book1.xlsx" `

  Opeing as *readonly*:

  `Workbooks.Open Filename:="C:\Users\Jeet\Document\Book1.xlsx", Readonly:=True `

  Opeing a password protected file:

  `Workbooks.Open Filename:="C:\Users\Jeet\Document\Book1.xlsx", Password:="ThisIsPassword" `

- Closing a Workbook:

  Closing `ActiveWorkbook.Close`

  Closing by index `Workbooks(1).Close`

  Close the *activeworkbook* and save changes  `ActiveWorkbook.Close savechanges:=True`

  Close the activeworkbook and without saving changes  `ActiveWorkbook.Close savechanges:=False`



### Coding Toolbox

**Variables**

`Dim` is used to define *local*  variable (Inside a *Sub* or a *Module*).  `Dim strMyString As String` 

`Public` is used to define *project* level variable.  `Public strMyString As String`    

Project level variables are declared in the "General Declaration Area" , declaration statement : Public, Scope: Available to all Modules and Subs in the project

Call a subroutine stored in a different Workbook: `Application.Run("'My Other Workbook.xlsx'!Module1.RunMe")`

Forcing Variable Declaration: `Option Explicit` at the very top of all codes

[This](https://analystcave.com/vba-variables-vba-dim-vba-data-types/) site has a good description on the different kind and declaration of VBA variables

**If then else**

```vb
If Condition1 Then
  'Runs if Condition1 is True
ElseIf Condition2 Then
  'Runs if Condition2 is True
'.....
Else 
  'Runs if neither Conditions above are True
End if
```

Boolean Operator: `AND`, `OR`, `NOT` 

Logical Operators: `=`, `<>`, `<` , `>`, `<=`, `>=`

One-line IIF: `maxOfTwo = Iif(val1 > val2, True, False)`

**For Next Loop**

```vb
For Counter = Start To End [ Step StepIncrement ]
   '...Code here...
Next [ Counter ]
```

Example:

```vb
Dim i as Long
 
For i = 5 To 1 Step -3
   Debug.Print i
Next i
'Result: 5,2
```

**For Each Loop** (very slow than *For* loop)

```vb
Dim x(4) as Long, xIterator as Variant
x(0) = 0: x(1) = 1: x(2) = 2: x(3) = 3
 
For Each xIterator in x
   Debug.Print x
Next xIterator
'Result: 0,1,2,3
```

**While Wend**

```vb
i = 0
'Will display 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
While i < 12
   MsgBox i
   i = i + 1
Wend
```

**Do While**

```vb
i = 0
'Will display 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
Do 
   MsgBox i
   i = i + 1
Loop While i < 12
```

OR,

```vb
i = 0
'Will display 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
Do While i < 12 
   MsgBox i
   i = i + 1
Loop 
```

**Do Until**

```vb
i = 0
'Will display 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
Do 
   MsgBox i
   i = i + 1
Loop Until i < 12
```

OR,

```vb
i = 0
'Will display 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11
Do Until i < 12 
   MsgBox i
   i = i + 1
Loop 
```

Exit Do While/Do Until: `Exit Do`

**Select Case**

```vb
Select Case MyMoney
Case Is < 20
    'Do something
Case Is <= 30
    'Do something
End Select
```

**Writing Formulas**

Absolute Reference: `ActiveCell.Formula = "65-G2"` OR,  `ActiveCell.FormulaR1C1 = "65-R2C7"` 

Relative Reference: `ActiveCell.FormulaR1C1 = "65-RC[-1]"`  Means, whatever is the active cell, RC[-1] will be on the same row of that active cell, but one column left of the active cell. 

For `Range`, this do *not* hold.

The `.Formula` is theoretically less efficient than `.FormulaR1C1` style but for most purposes it is indistinguishable.

- To use Excel's builtin functions you have to preceed it with *Application.WorksheetFunction*:

  Example: `Application.WorksheetFunction.VLookup(...)`



**Getting User-data using InputBox *Function*** 

```vb
Sub InputBox()
    Dim a as String
    Dim b as String
    a = InputBox("Enter first name", "Name Window Title - first")
    b = InputBox("Enter last name", "Name Window Title - second")
    FullString = a & b
    Range("A1").Value = FullString
End Sub
```

**Getting User-data using InputBox *Method*** 

This allows the user to click on a cell in Excel so that you get the cell address.

InputBox *Method* has different types specified by *Type*

```vb
Sub InputBox
    Dim a as Range
    set res = Application.InputBox("Click a cell", "Select Cell", Type:=8)
    MyAddress = res.Address
End Sub
```



**Message Box**

`MsgBox Range("A1").Value, vbOKOnly, "Hello is the Window Title"`



**Array**

To make array indexing start from 1, add `Option Base 1` at the top of the Module

*Static* Arrays: Before I forget the cons about static array is that even if you erase the data, a static array will still hold on to that memory.

`Dim MyArrayA(8) As String` , `Dim MyArrayA(8, 4) As String` 

Accessing Array elemements: `MyArrayA(1)`, or `MyArrayA(2)`, or `MyArrayA(5)`

*Dynamic* Arrays: 

To declare a dynamic array, `Dim MyDynArray() As String`

To assign the size of array later, `ReDim MyDynArray(sizeRow, sizeColumn)` where sizeRow and sizeColumn are the number that you assign as size.

Destroy a dynamic array with `Erase MyDynArray `



- Read a whole bunch of data directly at one-shot:

  ```vb
  Dim MyArrayA() As Variant
  MyArrayA = Range("A6").CurrentRegion
  ```

- Length of array: 

  ```vb
  RowCount = UBound(MyArrayA)
  ColCount = UBound(MyArrayA, 2)
  ```

- Write a whole bunch of data directly to a range at one-shot:

  ```vb
  Range(Cells(1, 1), Cells(RowCount, ColCount)) = MyArrayA
  ```



**GoTo**

`GoTo` statement can be used to go to a certain checkpoint marked by a unique Name.

Example: 

```vb 
checkPointName:
	...
	...
if sum = 0 Then GoTo checkPointName
```



**Using Array as a Data Source**

Let's say you want to VLOOKUP a *value* from an array *MyArrayA*. The syntax is very similar

`MyName = Application.WorksheetFunction.VLookup(value, MyArrayA, 2, False)`





**Good Resources**

https://analystcave.com/vba-cheat-sheet/